---
title: "1944"
description: The Advance West; Recapturing Soviet Territory and Entering Central Europe
date: 1944-01-01
---

## The German Army on the Defensive

By 1944 the Red Army and the Soviet Union had come online and were significantly more prepared to fight materially and in terms of morale. Materially, the 3.1 million Axis soldiers supported by 3,000 aircraft and 2,3000 tanks were not in a position to face off against the 6.4 million Red Army soldiers, the 13,400 planes covering them, and the 5,800 tanks leading them (Overy, 236). The majority of Axis forces were sent to the Eastern Front, and even then the disparity in numbers is staggering. 1944 also saw the Allies embark on D-Day, further reducing the resources available to be sent to the East and exacerbating the situation. Morale among the Red Army was also at an all-time high, no longer on the defensive against the veterans of the German Army they faced in 1941. 

Limited action would take place during the spring of 1944 due to weather issues, a common theme on the Eastern Front given the importance of mechanized warfare. With the exception of the Liberation of Leningrad, large-scale campaigns could not take place with the mud caused by spring thaws and the rain that followed, forcing both sides to wait out the weather or risk attacks in less than ideal conditions.

### Belarus and Operation Bagration

Operation Bagration was the codename given for the Soviet campaign in Belarus, taking back the last Soviet region with a significant German presence. Following the liberation of Leningrad and a northern push into the Baltics, the Soviets had to reconsider their campaign doctrine given the size of the front. March 1944 had the General Staff met in order to determine where the next assault should take place, as by this point even Stalin had accepted that mass assaults across the front would not work (Overy, 237). The decision was made to focus on Army Group Center rather than continue in the south, pushing past the Ukrainian territory recovered the previous year. The salient that had been created around Minsk was an obvious target for the Soviets, but the Germans believed that the south would be the next target and redeployed their forces according to this belief (Overy, 237). Planing for the operation took place in May, and the assault itself would begin the following month.

Operation Bagration began on June 23rd with one of the largest artillery bombardments in history, following the recon forces fighting German troops to ensure they would be within their trenches for the assault (Baker, 90). Concentrated attacks were used to break through the German lines, and quickly some sections fell apart as the shelling proved too much for the soldiers defending. Numerically, the Germans were outnumbered 4-to-1 in men, 9-to-1 in artillery, 10-to-1 in aircraft, and most worryingly 23-to-1 in tanks (Shepherd, 447). Despite these odds, however, Hitler forbade any retreat despite his generals declaring that they could not hold any of the cities in the salient. He would allow some division to retreat, but the cities themselves were to be held following their designation as "fortress cities" (Baker, 90-91).

In a little over a week, the operation would be concluded as its goals were achieved, but the Soviet advance continued. Minsk would be captured on July 3rd, but Red Army units were already well ahead of the cut-off city, securing encirclements of retreating German troops. Over 300,000 would be captured, with a further 100,000 soldiers also taken prisoner in the following weeks (Overy, 243). The comparison between the Red Army in 1944 and 1941 could not be more different, with the operation beginning on nearly the same day as Barbarossa. With the fall of Army Group Center, the north was now exposed to the south and further advancements were made by the Soviets. The Baltic States would also be taken again, and the famous Courland Pocket formed in Latvia, a region that would hold out until the end of the war in 1945 (Shepherd, 450).

### "Liberating" Central Europe

As advances were made against Army Group Center, the south also saw the Red Army push into both German-held territories and its "allies"/puppet-states. August 20th saw the Red Army advance into Romania, both to remove the remaining German troops in the Southern USSR and take Romania out of the war given their important role as fuel provider for the Axis. Within a few days, both German army groups and the Romanian army were defeated, and by August 31st Bucharest was captured (Baker, 97). The advance continued with the Soviet Union declaring war on Bulgaria in September, which had no German troops within its borders. A communist coup overthrew the government on September 9th, and Sofia welcomed the Red Army as heroes (Shepherd, 479; Baker, 97). 

This push into the Balkans culminated with an assault into Yugoslavia, which was under German occupation. September 28th saw the start of this advance, which would continue until October 20th. Belgrade would be captured on October 19th with the support of Yugoslavian partisans, as Germany was quickly realizing the danger this advance had given its ability to cut off its forces in Greece (Baker, 97). The Germans were able to stabilize the front and evacuate their forces between October and December, creating a new defensive line on the Bosnian-Macedonian border (Shepherd, 479). Further advances were delayed by the Red Army due to both issues with partisan forces adapting to conventional warfare, along with the redeployment of troops to other sections of the front.

Hungary was the last nation to be "liberated" during this period, as the Red Army continued its advance toward Germany. Within a few days in October, the Soviets had advanced 120 kilometers into the country, but the Germans were able to hold out on this front. This was due to the sudden importance of Hungary in the German Empire following the loss of the other states. Bucharest was an important rail hub between Austria and Bavaria along with its position on the Danube River and was Germany's largest source of foreign foodstuffs (Shepherd, 479). This made the country a vital region for Hitler, allowing it to hold out until early 1945.